[docs] New page presenting the `apiRef` (#5273)
mui/mui-x: docs/data/data-grid/api-object/api-object.md

---
title: Data Grid - API object
---

# Data grid - API object

> <p class="description">Interact with the grid using its api.</p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<p class="description">Interact with the grid using its API.</p>
```

## What is the API object ?

The API object is an interface containing the state and all the methods needed to interact imperatively with the grid.

You can find the list of all the available API methods on the [GridApi page](/x/api/data-grid/grid-api/).

:::warning

> All the methods prefixed by `unstable_` are private.

Reviewer 2: I thought `unstable_` was used more in the direction of an `alpha` version of an API method.
Would it make sense to consider `private_` in these cases?

Author: Right now it's the same prefix
And right now no `unstable_` is documented in a markdown file, even if theoretically we could indeed be used for features in alpha phase.

I suggest we leave it as is (with rewording if you want).
And we discuss if it's worth splitting in two prefixes in another PR.

> They should not be used by third party user and can be removed / renamed / reworked at any time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They should not be used by third party users and can be removed, renamed, reworked at any time.
```

> They should not be used by third party user and can be removed / renamed / reworked at any time.

Reviewer 2: further iteration
```suggestion
We don't recommend using them as they can be removed, renamed, or reworked at any time.
```

If you need to use a private method, please open a GitHub issue describing your use case.
We will help you to achieve the same goal with public methods, or we will discuss making this specific method public.
:::

## How to use the API object ?

The API object is accessible through the `apiRef` variable.
Depending on where you are trying to access this variable, you will have to use either `useGridApiContext` or `useGridApiRef`.

### Use it inside the grid

> If you need to access the api object inside component slots or inside renders (e.g: `renderCell`, `renderHeader`),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to access the API object inside component slots or inside renders (e.g: `renderCell`, `renderHeader`),
```

you can use the `useGridApiContext` hook.

```tsx
const apiRef = useGridApiContext();

<Button onClick={() => apiRef.current.setPage(1)}>Go to page 1</Button>;
```

:::info

> You don't have to initialize the API object using `useGridApiRef` to be able to it inside the grid components.

Reviewer: "you don't have to" seems like the user shouldn't initialize, but he still can.

```suggestion
It's not needed to initialize the API object using `useGridApiRef` to be able to use it inside the grid components.
```

Reviewer 2: Question: can the user use the `apiRef` inside the grid with `useGridApiRef`?
If that's the case, why not have a single hook?

Author: `useGridApiRef` creates a new `apiRef` that must be passed to the grid
So if they you it, it will just return something that they can't pass to the grid (since they are inside the grid)

:::

{{"demo": "UseGridApiContext.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Use it outside the grid [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](https://mui.com/store/items/mui-x-pro/)

When using the API object outside the grid components, you need to initialize it using the `useGridApiRef` hook.
You can then pass it to the `apiRef` prop of the grid.

```tsx

> const apiRef = useGridApiRef();

Reviewer: Maybe wrap this code in a function to give sense that it only works inside React components. Also, add the `return`.

<div>
  <Button onClick={() => apiRef.current.setPage(1)}>Go to page 1</Button>
  <DataGridPro apiRef={apiRef} {...other} />
</div>;
```

:::warning
The API object will be populated by the various plugins of the grid during the 1st render of our component.

> If you try to use it in the 1st render of your component, all the methods will be undefined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you try to use it in the 1st render of your component, it will crash since all methods are not registered yet.
```

:::

{{"demo": "UseGridApiRef.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Common use cases

### Retrieve data from the state

You can find a detailed example in the [State page](/x/react-data-grid/state/#access-the-state).

> ### Listen to grid events

Reviewer: Another suggestion is https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/5109

Author: What would you like to document exactly here ?

Author: Would you agree to add a section on the `State` page in a follow up PR and link it here ?

Reviewer: Yes.

---
title: Data Grid - API object
---

# Data grid - API object

<p class="description">Interact with the grid using its API.</p>

> ## What is the API object ?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## What is the API object?
```

The API object is an interface containing the state and all the methods available to programmatically interact with the grid.

You can find the list of all the API methods on the [GridApi page](/x/api/data-grid/grid-api/).

:::warning
All the methods prefixed by `unstable_` are private.
We don't recommend using them as they can be removed, renamed, or reworked at any time.

> 

Reviewer: Paragraphs inside callouts have `margin: 0`. I found weird to not have any space between them, so better to keep inside the same paragraph.

```suggestion
```

If you need to use a private method, please open a GitHub issue describing your use case.
We will help you to achieve the same goal with public methods, or we will discuss making this specific method public.
:::

> ## How to use the API object ?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## How to use the API object?
```

> ## How to use the API object ?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## How to use the API object
```

The API object is accessible through the `apiRef` variable.
Depending on where you are trying to access this variable, you will have to use either `useGridApiContext` or `useGridApiRef`.

### Use it inside the grid

> If you need to access the API object inside component slots or inside renders (e.g: `renderCell`, `renderHeader`),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you need to access the API object inside component slots or inside renders (e.g.: `renderCell`, `renderHeader`),
```

you can use the `useGridApiContext` hook.

```tsx

> const CustomFooter = () => {

Reviewer 3: What do you think about using the function syntax for component declarations? 

```suggestion
function CustomFooter() {
```

  const apiRef = useGridApiContext();

  return <Button onClick={() => apiRef.current.setPage(1)}>Go to page 1</Button>;
};
```

:::info

> It's not needed to initialize the API object using `useGridApiRef` to be able to use it inside the grid components.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You don't need to initialize the API object using `useGridApiRef` to be able to use it inside the grid components.
```
